# Introduce Central Exception Reporting

When you are using MulTEx, the main paradigm for error handling and reporting are Java exceptions. 
Any malfunction will be passed to the caller of a method by the standard Java means, an exception. 
This will be propagated to the upmost level, where it still can be caught, in order to report it. 
Handling of an individual exception should rarely be necessary.

Depending on the type of user interface, there are different places,
where you can catch all propagated exceptions. 
Sometimes it is not simple to find this place in the UI framework documentation. 
Sometimes you will not be able to find it, 
and must use a workaround in order to assure central exception reporting.

## Reporting in Command Line Applications

In a Java application, invoked from the command line, 
you should report, both the exception's messages, and its stack trace,
as the command line application typically does not have a button
for requesting the details of the stack trace.
The destination for the exception reporting usually will be `System.err`.

If you specify the main method as
```Java
public static void main(final String[] args) throws Exception {...}
```
you will already have a centralized exception reporting,
but the Java Runtime system will report only the stack trace
without giving nice textual error messages.

In order to get the textual message chain, and the stack trace,
you must write your main method as follows:

```Java
public static void main(final String[] args) {
    ... //check and report argument violations
    try{
        _doTheWork(args);
    }catch(final Exception e){
        multex.Msg.printReport(e);
    }
}
```
This will report to `System.err` the exception chain/tree messages
using for localization the resource bundle `MsgText` in the current working directory,
followed by the stack trace.
If you want to use another resource bundle for localization,
then use the variant

```Java
printReport(StringBuffer, Throwable, ResourceBundle)
```
instead, and print out the filled `StringBuffer`, afterwards.


## Reporting in Swing Applications

In a Java Swing application, you should report all exceptions by a variant
of the static `multex.Swing.report` methods.
These report at first a window with the messages of the exception causal chain/tree.
Then pressing on the button `Details` will expand the dialog
and show the stack traces of the exception chain/tree, too.

Usually the variant of method `multex.Swing.report`
with an owner component should be used,
as it will block further input to the owner component or its parent window,
until the exception message dialog has been closed by the user.

### Centralized exception reporting using javax.swing.AbstractAction

Using a simple variant of the *template method* design pattern,
you should write your own class, e.g. `UiAction`
as a subclass of `javax.swing.AbstractAction`:

```Java
public class UiAction extends javax.swing.AbstractAction {
    public void actionPerformed(ActionEvent ev){
        try{
            actionPerformedWithThrows(ev);
        }catch(Exception ex){
            multex.Swing.report(ev.getSource(), ex);
        }
    }
    public abstract void actionPerformedWithThrows(final ActionEvent ev) 
        throws Exception;
}
```
This class gets the UI component causing the event,
uses its parent chain to get the owner frame, and will block this during the exception reporting.
When using `UiAction` instead of `javax.swing.AbstractAction`
you must extend `UiAction` implementing the method `actionPerformedWithThrows` instead of implementing `actionPerformed`.

See a more elaborated example at the [Central Exception Reporting Sample Application](https://app.assembla.com/spaces/excrep/git/source), class [ExceptionReportingSwingAction](https://app.assembla.com/spaces/excrep/git/source/master/src/main/java/swing_ui/ExceptionReportingSwingAction.java).

### Last-resort Exception Reporting

In order to report all uncaught exceptions in a Swing or AWT application,
which occur during the execution of an UI-event-triggered action,
you can follow the [Debug Tips for AWT](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/troubleshoot/awt001.html) using the standard interface [Thread.UncaughtExceptionHandler](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Thread.UncaughtExceptionHandler.html).
In order to block input to the GUI application while reporting an exception,
it is necessary to locate the application's frame
and use it in the central exception handler's call to `report(...)`
as the `ownerHook`.

If an application has several frames,
and it is not possible to determine automatically,
which UI component must be blocked during exception reporting,
then you should use an own `UiAction` base class as was described earlier.

Attention: Propagating an exception from the method `actionPerformed`
will leave Swing in a dirty state.
Sometimes the focus of a menu item will be highlighted in another place,
than where Swing assumes it to be.
So you should on the one hand install such a last-resort exception reporting,
but nevertheless you need an `UiAction` for reporting exceptions
in all user-triggered actions.

## Reporting in JSP Applications

In a Java Server Pages application, you have several places,
where you should report exceptions.
These include firstly a JSP error page, which will be called by any unhandled exception.
Secondly each JSP page with an input form should contain an error message,
if something went wrong during execution of its action.
Thirdly, depending on the UI framework used, 
there is the possibility to report an exception near to the form field, which caused it.

### Last-resort exception reporting using an error page

In order to report all uncaught exceptions in a JSP/servlet application,
which occur during the execution of an UI-event-triggered action,
it is sufficient to install one central error page.
See section *2.4.2 Request Time Processing Errors*
of the Sun Java Server Pages Specification about this.

In Tomcat you can do this in the deployment descriptor `web.xml`
by an `<error-page>` directive. E.g.:

```HTML
<error-page>
    <exception-type>java.lang.Throwable</exception-type>
    <location>/system/errorPage.jsp</location>
</error-page>
```
This means, that any exception, including `Throwable`,
will be reported by forwarding to the JSP page `/system/errorPage.jsp`.
The error page itself must be marked as such
by setting the page directive's `isErrorPage` attribute to `true`, e.g.:
```HTML
<%@page contentType="text/html" isErrorPage="true" %>        
```

In such an error page you should report not only the message texts of the exception chain,
but also it's stack trace and diagnostically useful attributes 
of the request, session, and application.

See an example at the [Central Exception Reporting Sample Application](https://app.assembla.com/spaces/excrep/git/source).

### Centralized exception reporting with Struts using org.apache.struts.action.Action

In Struts 1.3.8 you have the possibility to define a central exception handler
using the `<global-exceptions>` element of file `struts-config.xml`.
The central exception handler class must implement the interface
`org.apache.struts.action.ExceptionHandler`.
This works very well and has access to the causing UI component.

A template method for the `execute` methods you need only,
if you want to handle other action related issues centrally, e.g. transaction management.

See an example at the [Central Exception Reporting Sample Application](https://app.assembla.com/spaces/excrep/git/source).

#### Form Field related Exception Reporting with Struts

One student group even implemented centralized exception reporting for form field related exceptions. 
In Struts it is possible to `saveErrors` or `saveMessages`
indicating the name of the offending field of the form working on.
This will place the message in the appropriately marked position in the form.

In the central exception handler for Struts you can specifically handle exceptions,
which are related to a form field.
E.g. a `FieldvalueExc` could port the identifier of the related field,
so that `UiAction` could put the exception message into the good position.

Another idea is to find the place in Struts, 
where any exception occurring in a `setXxx()` method of a form bean
can be caught and reported into the form near to the field `xxx`.


## Centralized Exception Reporting with Java Server Faces
Here is described the solution of the student project TriplePlay in summer 2005.

The [JavaServer Faces life cycle](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/tutorial/jsf-intro006.htm)
is directed by an implementation of the interface `Lifecycle`
(in the package `javax.faces.lifecycle`.
The reference implementation of Sun is `com.sun.faces.lifecycle.LifecycleImpl`).

When the web application is started, a `LifecycleFactory` (also in package
`javax.faces.lifecycle`, reference implementation of Sun is
`com.sun.faces.lifecycle.LifecycleFactoryImpl`)
is asked to return a `Lifecycle` object.
Normally the standard implementation will be taken.
But you have the possibility to change the `LifecycleFactory`,
and to return your own `Lifecycle` implementation.

In detail: Here are the two classes, which we have written.
You can subclass the reference implementation, or you can completely implement the interface.
We take the first approach.

```Java
package myPackage; //MyLifecycleFactoryImpl.java
  
import javax.faces.FacesException;
import javax.faces.lifecycle.Lifecycle;

public class MyLifecycleFactoryImpl 
extends com.sun.faces.lifecycle.LifecycleFactoryImpl {

  public Lifecycle getLifecycle(final String i_lifecycleId) 
  throws FacesException {
    return new MyLifecycleImpl();
  }

}
```
```Java
package myPackage; //MyLifecycleImpl.java 

import javax.faces.FacesException;
import javax.faces.context.FacesContext;

public class MyLifecycleImpl extends com.sun.faces.lifecycle.LifecycleImpl {

  public void execute(final FacesContext io_facesContext) {
    try {
      super.execute(io_facesContext);
    } catch(final FacesException e) {
      // handleExceptions here
    }
  }

}
```

Now we still have to instruct JavaServer Faces, 
that we want to use our own `LifecycleFactory` implementation
instead of the default implementation.
This we have to do in the file `faces-config.xml`
(a configuration file similar to `struts-config.xml`).

```XML
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE faces-config PUBLIC
  "-//Sun Microsystems, Inc.//DTD JavaServer Faces Config 1.0//EN"
  "http://java.sun.com/dtd/web-facesconfig_1_0.dtd">
<faces-config>
  ...
  <factory>
    <lifecycle-factory>myPackage.MyLifecycleFactoryImpl</lifecycle-factory>
  </factory>
  ...
</faces-config>
```

Having done this, our implementation of the `LifecycleFactory` will be used,
which in turn will deliver in the method `getLifecycle` (see before)
our own `Lifecycle` implementation.

## Reporting in background thread

If the `run()` method of a thread terminates due to an uncaught exception,
then by default, this thread will die
and the stack trace of this exception will be printed to `System.err`.

This default behaviour is not satisfactory.
At first, we would like to see the exception message chain, too.
And secondly, we would really like to see it in the application's user interface,
instead of in a may-be suppressed console output.

### Last-resort Exception Reporting
In order to report all uncaught exceptions of all background threads,
you must place all the threads in your own `ThreadGroup`.
For this `ThreadGroup` you redefine the  method:
```Java
void uncaughtException(Thread t, Throwable e)
```
In this method you can report the exception chain 
in the format, and to the destination, you want.
You should try to report to the user interface (UI),
if the thread was created or started by an UI event,
e.g. if it implements an action,
hich would last too long for the user to await its completion.

Since Java 5 there is also such a possibility without the necessity to create thread groups.
The method 
```Java
public static void setDefaultUncaughtExceptionHandler(
  Thread.UncaughtExceptionHandler eh
)
```
installs a last-resort exception handler for all thread groups together.

### Exception Reporting in long-living threads

But for a long-living thread, usually serving commands or alike,
and not triggered by a user action,
we cannot tolerate to stop the thread.
Thus such a server thread should catch 
in its command loop in the `run()` method
any exception and report it to a logging destination.

Also here it would be useful to inform the user, if any exists,
that a required service failed, and where is the appropriate logfile.